Now, in its entirety, Proverbs 21:5 says:
“The plans of the diligent
“surely lead to success,
“but all who are hasty
surely head for poverty.”
Now, that is not a Bible law;
it’s a Bible principle.
And before we discuss
how Proverbs 21:5 might be applied,
let’s be reminded again of the difference
between a law and a principle.
We’ve had articles on it.
We’ve had it discussed
at our circuit assembly.
But still there are some in our congregations
who would have a hard time
making the distinction between the two.
A principle, just one principle,
can be broadly applied
to many different situations
and decisions in life,
whereas a Bible law addresses
just one very precise, very specific, action.
You could turn to 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10
concerning some areas of life
where Jehovah has explicit commands, or laws.
And here at 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10,
it reflects some of those laws of God:
“Or do you not know that unrighteous people
“will not inherit God’s Kingdom?
“Do not be misled.
“Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters,
“adulterers, men who submit
to homosexual acts,
“men who practice homosexuality,
“thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers,
and extortioners
will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”
These represent some laws of God.
“Do not commit adultery.”
That’s a law.
“Do not steal.”
Do not become a drunkard.
Those are laws—very clear.
There’s no interpretation necessary.
It’s a yes-or-no, do-or-don’t situation.
But what about principles?
How do they differ from laws?
Well, a principle
is a basic truth in God’s Word
that can help us to make good decisions.
Now, as Christians,
we all face situations in life
for which there is
no regulation in the Bible.
We have to reason things out
and make a decision.
Just to illustrate:
Suppose you’re driving in the countryside
and there’s a herd of deer
running toward the road.
What will you do?
Well, there’s no law
that says you should speed up
and get there before they do.
There’s no law that says you
should just continue
at 55 miles an hour (90 km/h)
and see what happens.
But what would you likely do?
Well, you would slow down the car.
And how could you make
that decision without a law?
You reasoned on the principle,
and the principle is safety,
and you made a good decision.
Or there’s a sign—55 miles an hour (90 km/h).
Now, that is a law.
You’re not to go over 55 (90)
on that section of the roadway.
But what if there’s a blinding rainstorm?
Would you insist on going 55 miles an hour
(90 km/h) because it’s allowed?
No.
Again, using the very same
principle of safety,
you would slow down and make a good decision.
So there were two situations with no law.
But by applying the same principle,
you made a good decision.
Well, do we have some examples
of principles that could be applied
as we make decisions
on life’s roadway?
How about Romans 15:3?
“The Christ did not please himself.”
Can you imagine how many situations in life
that this would instantly answer our question
as to what we should do?
Or James 4:4:
“Friendship with the world
is enmity with God.”
That could be applied
to associations, to movies,
to music, to clothing styles,
and so much more.
So when some issue or decision
is about to jump out in front of us,
we need to slow down
and search for a principle.
Please find Ephesians chapter 5.
It has a phrase that coincides
with searching for a principle.
We’ll read verse 15 first of all.
It says: “So keep strict watch
that how you walk
is not as unwise but as wise persons.”
Well, that could be
by simply obeying a Bible law.
Do not commit adultery.
Do not steal.
Keep strict watch that you act wisely.
But now notice verse 17;
it’s worded differently.
It says: “On this account
stop being unreasonable.”
So it’s alluding to the fact
that we should reason on a matter.
And here’s what it says:
“But keep perceiving
what the will of Jehovah is.”
So in this case, there’s no law spelling out
exactly what we do but we have to ‘perceive.’
That means we search for
and apply a Bible principle.
Then we’re perceiving what God’s will is.
Now, I’m not trying to complicate matters,
but sometimes a specific law of God
is underpinned
by a basic truth, or principle.
For example, Deuteronomy 22:8 was a law.
The Israelites had to build a parapet wall
around the flat roof of their home
to prevent people from falling
and being injured or possibly killed.
That was a law.
But what was the underlying principle?
It was respect for human life.
And that principle can be applied
to so many circumstances in life now.
Respect for human life.
For example, there is nothing in the Bible
that talks about tobacco products.
But a person coming into the truth
makes a good decision
by applying the principle of respect for life
—his own life and the health of others.
So our text at Proverbs 21:5 is a principle.
That means it can be applied
to so many different situations in our life.
And again, it says:
“The plans of the diligent
surely lead to success,
but all who are hasty
surely head for poverty.”
So, what are some situations
that our publications
have applied that principle to?
Well, one is commenting at meetings.
We have to plan ahead to have success.
Or maybe we’re in some form
of full-time service
and our parents become seriously ill.
Well, Proverbs 21:5 says: ‘Do not be hasty.’
So we should not hastily conclude
that we have to give up
our privilege of service.
Possibly by planning,
we could ‘surely have success.’
Living within one’s means, financially.
At Proverbs 21:5, in this case,
the plan has a name; it’s called a budget.
But then we have people
making decisions on who they will marry.
Do not be hasty.
Or maybe a couple is deciding on
whether to have children or not.
Don’t make a hasty decision.
Look beyond that cute,
little, cooing baby face,
and consider the pros and cons.
Or brothers approaching retirement age
—Proverbs 21:5 will help them
make a good decision.
So that’s just a sampling
of the variety of situations
that this one verse
can help us with to make good decisions.
We’re so thankful to Jehovah
that he has provided specific laws
that we must obey,
but he’s also given us a host of principles
that can help us make good decisions.
And by implementing
both of those in our life,
we can maintain
a clean conscience before our God.